HARI SREENIVASAN: Now a
lesson in communication
from an unlikely, but
very familiar source.
It's the latest addition to
the "NewsHour" Bookshelf.
Jeffrey Brown has that.
JEFFREY BROWN: One enormous
turn in the life of Alan Alda,
his 11- year run in the 1970s
and '80s as the star of
"MASH," one of the most beloved
programs in television history.
ALAN ALDA, Author, "If
I Understood You, Would
I Have This Look on
My Face?": Hello, and
welcome to "Scientific
American Frontiers."
JEFFREY BROWN: Another, by
his own account, came in 1993,
when he began to host the PBS
series "Scientific
American Frontiers."
He was a non-scientist learning
on the go, using his trademark
humor and wit to get the
experts to explain complicated
ideas in accessible language.
ALAN ALDA: What keeps the
water from going in here?
I mean, it's...
MAN: Well, it's
actually tapered.
If you look at the hatch,
it's like a porthole.
ALAN ALDA: Oh, I see.
MAN: And pressure
pushes them down.
ALAN ALDA: What I brought
to it was curiosity and
a huge fund of ignorance.
(LAUGHTER)
ALAN ALDA: And I just was
after them until it could fill
up the ignorance a little bit
with real stuff.
But that process of connecting
with them, getting them to
be who they were, because
they were worried about
getting me to understand it,
so it was much more personal.
And that's when I realized
that you could build on that.
You can help people
do that all the time.
OK, now he's leaving.
JEFFREY BROWN: First, he
worked to help scientists
and science writers do
it all the time, helping
to found the Center for
Communicating Science at Stony
Brook University in New York.
Now comes a book for the rest
of us, with the colorful title
"If I Understood You, Would
I Have This Look on My Face?"
Alan Alda and I met recently at
Lisner Auditorium in Washington
before he gave a talk about
the problem and promise
of communicating.
ALAN ALDA: What I think I found
is, that it's all based on a
personal connection, that if
I can sort of understand in some
way, make some approximation
of what you are thinking
and feeling, it's easier
for me to get inside your
head with my message.
If I don't know how you're
receiving it, if I can't see
how it's landing on you, then
I'm just spraying it at you.
I'm just trying to pour it
over your head, but I'm not
really connecting with you.
Well, that connection -- this
is what I don't understand --
that connection with another
person feels so good.
Why do we retreat from it?
I don't understand that.
JEFFREY BROWN: We're living in
a time where there's not only
skepticism, but even outright
hostility from a lot of
people towards science.
Is that just a
communication problem?
ALAN ALDA: I think it's largely
a communication problem, because
there has to be trust, and
you get trust through --
one way you get trust is
through good communication.
There are lives at stake.
Take doctors.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
ALAN ALDA: When patients
regard their doctors as being
empathic, at least one study has
shown that the patients are
19 percent more likely to
follow the doctor's advice.
Now, in that 19 percent, I
imagine some lives are at stake.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes,
so some of this is
life-and-death communication.
ALAN ALDA: Yes.
Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
ALAN ALDA: Science needs to
be understood by the public,
so they can support science.
I don't tell the people I
care about the most the most
important thing I can tell them,
that I do care.
JEFFREY BROWN: For Alda, better
communicating starts with better
person-to-person relating,
a concept he had to
learn as a young actor.
ALAN ALDA: I knew you
were supposed to relate
in the beginning.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
ALAN ALDA: And I would do
the best I could to relate.
I thought it meant leaning
into the other person's face,
so I was sort of stooped over
most of the time.
(LAUGHTER)
ALAN ALDA: But, little
by little, I realized you
can relate to somebody
on the stage even
if their back is turned to you.
You pick up whatever
clues you can.
And when you don't have clues
to pick up, you can estimate
what they're probably thinking
by virtue of what's just been
said, or what you have said,
or what you have just written
them.
You can picture what the
reader is thinking with
each sentence you put down.
It really affects all
forms of communication.
JEFFREY BROWN: In several
chapters of the book, you
describe these training sessions
that you had with
scientists and many others.
But then you talk about
improv classes, right?
Improv, we think of as comedy.
ALAN ALDA: I know.
Most improvisation that
people are aware of is
comedy improvisation.
But that's not what we teach.
We teach a much purer
form of improvisation in
the form of exercises.
And they're all designed one
on top of the other, starting
with a very basic kind of
exercise that enables you to
do the next one, and then that
enables you to do the next one,
and they all put you in
touch with the other person.
You have to observe the
other person, and really
carefully to improvise.
I have to know -- I have to
know, from your body language
and your face, what you're doing
and what you're thinking.
I'm reading your face right now.
It's really fun.
Let's make it...
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
What's going on?
(LAUGHTER)
ALAN ALDA: Yes.
Well, I hear you following me,
and then I hear you thinking,
I wonder what I will ask
next?
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: Really?
You could see that?
(CROSSTALK)
ALAN ALDA: Yes, from
-- yes, mostly when you
look down at the paper.
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes, right.
That's a dead giveaway.
Hmm.
ALAN ALDA: Yes, but
I'm picking it up.
You know.
It's so funny.
Once in a while I will be
talking to somebody and I will
think I'm connected to them.
And I will say, wait a second.
In my head, I will say this.
What color is his eyes?
What color are his eyes?
What's the shape of his nose?
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
And then you realize,
what, you're not really
paying attention.
ALAN ALDA: I got -- I realize,
when I think back, there's
been sort of a blob where your
face would -- should be.
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: I hope I
haven't dissolved to blobness.
ALAN ALDA: No, you're
not blobby at all, no.
JEFFREY BROWN: OK.
Thank you.
That's good to know, and also
good to see in his work with
scientists and writers an
attempt to bridge the worlds
of science and the arts.
ALAN ALDA: They didn't used
to be kept apart so much.
Science and art, or the arts
and humanities often were --
in Greek times and later, were
considered to be different
aspects of the same inquiry,
the same exploration of being
alive in the universe.
And I think they're long-lost
lovers, yearning to be reunited.
There's nothing -- they
should be reunited.
We're reuniting them with
this work on communication,
because it's both an
art and a science to
figure out what's the best way
to learn to communicate better.
JEFFREY BROWN: All
right, Alan Alda's book
is "If I Understood
You, Would I Have This
Look on My Face?"
It's quite a title.
ALAN ALDA: Well, you
have quite a face.
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN:
Thank you very much.
ALAN ALDA: Thank you.
I had fun with you.
JEFFREY BROWN: Nice
to talk to you.
ALAN ALDA: Thank you.